Raw reads feature branch (#1105)
pathoplexus/pathoplexus: monorepo/website/src/pages/docs/how-to/upload-sequences.mdx

Reviewer: oh... we should update this on main, we also would like submitters to supply the bioprojectAccession and biosampleAccession

Reviewer 2: We should probably link to raw reads docs from this file somewhere

import InfoBox from '../../../components/asides/InfoBox.astro';

The process of submitting sequences to Pathoplexus consists of three sequential steps; sequence upload, review/editing, and approval.
Submitting sequences to Pathoplexus requires you to have [created an account](create-account) and to be part of a [group](create-group).
If you already have an account and belong to more than one group, make sure that the appropriate group you are currently submitting sequences for is selected from the drop-down menu in the top left before proceeding with the submission process.

> Before starting the upload process, ensure that your data is correctly formatted. Every sequence must have a unique ID that can be used to link it with its metadata entry. 

Reviewer: I just realize we dont mention in this doc that this is the format for bulk submission, but we also offer users the option to submit one sequence at a time, maybe we should still mention this

- Raw reads files in `fastq` format (optional).
- Metadata for each sample with a unique `id`.
  - When uploading through the API, only `tsv` is supported.
  - When uploading through the website, `xlsx` files are also accepted.
  - Each organism has its own metadata template available on the submission page.
  - On the website, you can map columns from your file to the expected metadata fields using the **Add column mapping** option.

The metadata and sequence data files can be compressed: accepted formats here are .zst, .gz, .zip and .xz. Raw reads files may also be compressed, but only using the .gz format (to facilitate submission to INSDC).

Metadata and sequences will be matched using the `id` column in the metadata (i.e., the sequence with fasta ID `seq_12` will be joined with the metadata entry with `id` of `seq_12`). You can also provide an additional metadata field called `fastaIds` containing a space-separated list of fasta IDs to link multiple sequences to a single submission, e.g., `seq_12_A seq_12_B`. This can for example be used when submitting multi-segmented pathogens.

> Similarly, raw reads files will be associated to their corresponding consensus sequence via the `fileIds` metadata field. This field should contain a space-separated list of file names indicating which raw reads files belong to which sequence. Raw reads for the full submission should be uploaded as a single (possibly nested) folder containing raw reads files for all sequences (see [here](/docs/how-to/attach-additional-files) for a detailed description of how to attach raw reads files).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, raw reads files will be associated to their corresponding consensus sequence via the `files.rawReads` metadata field. This field should contain a space-separated list of file names indicating which raw reads files belong to which sequence. Raw reads for the full submission should be uploaded as a single folder containing raw reads files for all sequences (see [here](/docs/how-to/attach-additional-files) for a detailed description of how to attach raw reads files).
```

- Raw reads files in `fastq` format (optional).
- Metadata for each sample with a unique `id`.
  - When uploading through the API, only `tsv` is supported.
  - When uploading through the website, `xlsx` files are also accepted.
  - Each organism has its own metadata template available on the submission page.
  - On the website, you can map columns from your file to the expected metadata fields using the **Add column mapping** option.

The metadata and sequence data files can be compressed: accepted formats here are .zst, .gz, .zip and .xz. Raw reads files may also be compressed, but only using the .gz format (to facilitate submission to INSDC).

Metadata and sequences will be matched using the `id` column in the metadata (i.e., the sequence with fasta ID `seq_12` will be joined with the metadata entry with `id` of `seq_12`). You can also provide an additional metadata field called `fastaIds` containing a space-separated list of fasta IDs to link multiple sequences to a single submission, e.g., `seq_12_A seq_12_B`. This can for example be used when submitting multi-segmented pathogens.

> Similarly, raw reads files will be associated to their corresponding consensus sequence via the `files.rawReads` metadata field. This field should contain a space-separated list of file names indicating which raw reads files belong to which sequence. Raw reads for the full submission should be uploaded as a single folder containing raw reads files for all sequences (see [here](/docs/how-to/attach-additional-files) for a detailed description of how to attach raw reads files).

Reviewer 2: The `here` goes 404 at least in my tests on preview

Author: Good catch! Renamed the file without updating links 😅

You can also modify the restriction period after submission. Note you can only shorten the period or make sequences `Open`, you cannot extend the restriction period. You will need to be logged in as a user with the appropriate authorization to make these changes.
</InfoBox>

## Bulk submission

This section describes how to perform Bulk submissions, where you can submit multiple sequences at the same time.

### Expected data format

- Sequence data in `fasta` format with a unique fasta ID per sequence. The fasta ID is the start of the header up to and excluding the first white space character. For example the fasta header `>seq_12` has fasta ID `seq_12`.
- Raw reads files in `fastq` format (optional).
- Metadata for each sample with a unique `id`.
  - When uploading through the API, only `tsv` is supported.
  - When uploading through the website, `xlsx` files are also accepted.
  - Each organism has its own metadata template available on the submission page.
  - On the website, you can map columns from your file to the expected metadata fields using the **Add column mapping** option.

> The metadata and sequence data files can be compressed: accepted formats here are .zst, .gz, .zip and .xz. Raw reads files may also be compressed, but only using the .gz format (to facilitate submission to INSDC).

Reviewer: ah I think .zip is also accepted - we should update the code

Reviewer: ah no I just confirmed zip does not work (it is mentioned in a readtools docs but doesnt actually work)

## Uploading raw reads

The most convenient way to upload raw reads that are associated with your sequences is to included them directly in your submission using the instructions on this page.

> However, it is also possible to upload your raw reads to the INSDC yourself and link them to your consensus sequence on Pathoplexus (if you have a specific Bioproject or Biosample you want to use, for example). In that case, you can submit your raw reads directly through the [INSDC submission portal](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/reads.html) and link them to sequences in Pathoplexus. 

Reviewer: I actually think we should stop offering this option after add raw reads support as it is error prone. We can tell people they can submit raw reads to the bioproject and biosample we generated when we submitted the consensus sequences (for example if they have a complicated raw reads set up that we do not handle) but then we can stop accepting biosamples and having to link to existing raw reads as this always took so long and has been shown to be massively error prone.

Reviewer: I do think we should keep the option for submitters to add a specific bioproject (this is a common request and less error prone). We can maybe add this to an info box or as an faq (also noting we cannot accept umbrella bioprojects)

Author: Yeah sounds good! I was wondering about this as well while writing. Would make life easier if we don't need to deal with this anymore :)

Author: I removed most of these docs and instead added a 'Using your own Bioproject' subsection, we can also move this to the FAQ if you think it's better
